Today's talk, the title is: Fake news. Fake Money, and Living in a World Without Authority"
so
fake news has been in the news, a lot, lately and
you have all of these accusations swirling around, right?
the established media, The New York Times, The Washington Post
They're pointing fingers and going these purveyors of fake news
primarily at internet-based sites
and internet-based sites are pointing right back
and going
Do you remember Judith Miller? Anybody who remembers Judith Miller?
Yeah
"There are WMDs, with aluminum tubes, in Iraq"
bullshit
so fake news
Happens on both sides right, and that's really the perplexing thing. How did we arrive in a world
where we can't even tell what's true
and what isn't?
You see well established
backbones of Authority and truth like the Washington Post in The New York Times or even CNN
Fox News and other TV
CBS and ABC, and what are they doing? They're cheerleading for a war based on false premises
and that was just last week
again
Not Iraq, Syria this time, right? You're like. Did we learn nothing?
Did we learn nothing? We didn't learn anything. How did we arrive at this world?
why do we have this debate over fake news?
and part of it has to do with the rise of the internet in the early 90s
so work with me here. Let's walk through the steps
the internet didn't disrupt newspapers and TV companies
by
stealing their audience for news
That came much, much later
first
the internet
disrupted their sources of most profitable revenue
and for newspapers that was the classified advertising section. That was where they made most of their money
small business advertising in the classified section
and the internet came along and
and Craig Craiglisted that shit, right? Just completely undermined it. Ah! you can do all of that free, and it's instantaneous
and boom, and suddenly
all of the most profitable revenue disappears
and the newspapers
have to adapt
And then happened again with TV. They started losing
advertising revenue to the new popular websites that were getting more eyeballs
so they started losing first
the local and small advertisers, who were able to position ads targeted to specific
demographics and audiences, because they could get much more fine-grained information. TV is a one-way thing, you have no idea who's watching, right?
and
with the internet they could really target advertising, so TV starts losing
advertising revenue too. So what do they do? You know, trim the fat, right? Trim the fat
so in newspapers that's a
Journalist, we don't really need them. So, no foreign desk, cut that
Investigative journalism, cut that. You know. What's selling more papers?
you know "Ask Judy" and the astrology section and
infotainment, and cartoons, and sensationalist news, and if it bleeds it leads
and
inexorably the long
downtrend of
the news industry started, they gutted their foreign desks. They gutted their investigative journalism
They gutted their fact-checking, they  gutted their copy editor desks, until what was left was
a bunch of interns running around
copying the press releases of powerful corporations and presenting them as fact
and taking notes when someone who seemingly was important said something, not questioning any of it and just writing it down pushing it as truth
fake news happened
because
the very basis for producing truth
was removed from the very institutions whose job it was to produce truth
and this caused the very weird situation
Because until that time
How do you know if something's true? Well?
The New York Times said it, The Washington Post said it, it was on CBS
Surely they have fact checked it, therefore, it's the truth
The fundamental basis for discovery of truth was to examine the source
You go to college. You're writing an essay. They say
What are you basing this argument for? Give me citations, source your argument. Where are the facts?
and if you took a headline from the New York Times, and sourced it, they go "Ok great, That's a citation
that's valid, it's a valid source"
We used the issuer
to determine the quality of what they issued, we looked at the
authority of the news based on the authority of the institution that said it
Because that was a good model
that was a good heuristic. That gave us a good false positive false negative ratio. It was a bet,
it was a way to say I can't fact check all of that, but these people have, so
if I read I
I will become not only educated, but also informed
And now we're in a situation where the people who watch the most TV and read the most newspapers are
the least informed part of the electorate
How did that happen?
Because the institutions are still standing
their authority is still standing, in some ways
The basis of credibility is still there
They still have the big buildings, lots of circulation and big name
But the mechanism that delivers truth is no longer there, the mechanism that ensured quality is no longer there
or is significantly eroded
and what's their response to that? We'll try harder?
No, they turn, they look at the internet, and they go: "you're fake news"
and
arguably a lot of the stuff on the internet is fake news, because it never had any of the mechanisms of producing truth
but the internet that has none of the mechanisms, and the newspapers that no longer have any of the
mechanisms are now producing truth on a relatively equal basis
every now and then some blogger uncovers some incredible story that nobody has noticed, and it is the truth
and the networks pick it up, and every now and then, the institutions of traditional truth fall flat on their face
and deliver bullshit to us
packaged in a fancy name
and people start questioning whether they should believe anything
What's the option? Where do you go from here?
Do you have to evaluate every fact for yourself? Do you have to build into your critical thinking the fact-checking department that they fired?
How do you go about evaluating every piece of knowledge
as fact or fake news
well
there's an easy heuristic
if the esteemed leader of your political party says it's fake news, it's fake news
Now we outsourced fact-finding to the tribe that we belong to. If the tribal leader
says that those guys are lying, we just go with it. Right?
happens Bitcoin too
Tribalism is part of the human nature
But what's really interesting
Is that what just happened in news, that has left an entire generation of people now unable to discern truth from fiction
easily manipulated through propaganda
What I'm going to suggest today, is that this is about to happen to money
This is about to happen to money. How do you know
money is valuable?
I get asked this question every time I do a seminar about Bitcoin, especially if there's people in the audience who are new. They say but
Bitcoin isn't backed by anything
This thing I have in my pocket, It says
Central Bank of blah blah, it's backed by
the Nation, the Queen, the King, the Parliament, the GDP of my country
or the gold that we have in our vaults.
(You don't have any gold in your vaults!)
They still think there's gold in the vaults! Many people do. It's a common misconception
Most of my understanding of money comes from myth
it is just barely removed from the level of myth that is
Santa Claus. We have this constructed fantasy about money that we have received as children,
and then as adults, when we notice in consistencies we kind of just shore it up with some
rusty nails and some planks to keep it in place
And we try to keep the the illusion, and as part of that we adopt these preposterous ideas
such as: oh there's gold in the vaults, so then if the yeah, it's it kind of works. I don't know, now
go make your room. Don't ask me any more questions, honey. I don't understand money either
We had a heuristic and the heuristic was
if a stable, democratic,
government, based on some broadly free principles
sanely manages the economy. If they say it has value, it has value
And that's a great heuristic that removes the necessity for us to independently evaluate
Every note that comes into our hands, you know will this still be worth 20 dollars tomorrow?
Okay, not this one because this one was counterfeit as I told you before, but this other one, this one's real
Will this still be worth $20 tomorrow? Yeah? It will be worth $20, may not buy you $20 in today's money
maybe it will buy you
$19.80 in a year, and you don't really notice that, so that's okay
But you trust, you trust that it's still going to be there
unless you're Greek
or
Cypriot, or Venezuelan, or Argentinian, or Brazilian, or from Zimbabwe, or from the Ukraine, or from
You know, just keep adding to that list. It happened so many times
one day you wake up and you discover that the banks are closed, and
the bank governors on TV, and they say: "people don't panic everything is under control"
And when a government official says that, you know..
PANIC!
That's the time!
...to panic. Now it's about who gets to line up in front of the bank, because they're not opening next week as they promised
The temporary emergency measure will become a permanent emergency measure
guaranteed, every time, so line up and run for your money in the bank
and suddenly the institution of money has crumbled
and now what do you trust?
Now you go back to basics, things that you can examine and validate for yourself: gold, chicken, rice, salt, sugar
Whatever you can get your hands on, or that other country's money
US Dollar is hard currency, right?
and so the concept of money is one of those things that primarily holds value, because we attribute
the value as a direct result of its issuance by trusted Authority, and we outsource our own
determination of value to this trusted third party. And what happens when that trusted third party
stops delivering on that promise?
On purpose, by accident, through mismanagement, or deliberately, who knows?
But one day
that phrase that seemed so meaningful and strong and
satisfying
"The Full
Faith and Credit
of the
United States
Government"
America!
The Full Faith! not just some of the faith, the full faith and credit of the entire United States of America
satisfying, okay compare it to this one: "The Full Faith and Credit of The
National Bank of Zimbabwe"
Do you cry? do you laugh? Do you run? What do you do at that point? that sentence
no longer has much weight to it, right? That thing that you put all your faith in
Because they give you their full faith and credit, and in return, you give all of your full faith and credit
in return
Every time you receive one of those bills
you are giving credit
You're giving them a product or service in return for the bill. That's credit
You're giving faith, your full faith and credit, and your full faith and credit is based on
absolutely no rational thinking other than you somehow believe in
this thing that's printed on it, "The Full Faith and Credit"
I have a prediction
This sentence is going to become increasingly untenable
not just in the hot spots, not just in the back waters
Not just in the developing nations, in the third world as we used to call them, but in many places simultaneously
220 Trillion dollars of debt
say that the phrase "the full faith and credit" is ringing hollow all around the world, and what happens
when they can no longer shore it up?
Because Bitcoin is not going after
replacing National currencies, oh no
is doing something far more dangerous
It's encouraging people to put their savings
outside the system, and that is the worst thing you can do to assist them, based on "full faith and credit". We are taking away
the Credit and the
Faith
by presenting an alternative
that some people will find more useful, and in some places where the full faith and credit of the national currency has
been damaged they will flock to
Bitcoin as a
valuable alternative, because they know
that it's safer, and we're seeing that happen. We saw it happen
in masses after November 8th in India when
Narenda Modi demonetized 86% of
the Country's money
Where's the faith now? no full faith?
Can you print on the money: "The 14% faith and credit of the National Bank of India"?
we took out 86% so that leaves 14%. "This money is backed by the 14 percent of faith and credit of the...
...of the national bank of India" Doesn't sound so good, people flock to Bitcoin
So just like it wasn't bloggers
challenging the truth of news that created
this
dichotomy of fake news. It wasn't better news gathering that undermined the newspapers
it was
indermining their advertising revenue, cutting off their feet
Cutting off at the knees, really. And then forcing them to adjust their news gathering to the new level of income they had
What happens when Bitcoin does that to banks?
because when they say "close all the doors, and keep all the money in"
And there's one door they can't close, Because it's Bitcoin and the money keeps leaking
and leaking, and they say: "put the minister on television!"
"Tell them everything is going to be fine"
"The Yuan will not be devalued any further, the full faith and credit of the people's bank
of China is
behind this currency" And then a month later
it's devalued another half percent, and that's happened eight times the past year and at some point
you're like that doesn't count anymore
I'm taking my money elsewhere,
and a few people do, and a trickle of billions of dollars is fled into Bitcoin, from the Yuan
and the insidious damage it's doing is not in offering a better way for Chinese people to buy things,
to invest in companies, to transact with each other
it's undercutting the very source of revenue
and value
and stability of a national currency
by removing the full faith and credit of the people, and putting it in an alternative currency. By taking their savings
and instead of putting it in a deposit account, where it becomes the basis for fractional reserve lending
they're sucking liquidity out of the economy, and that is the worst thing you can do with an economy like that
So what are they doing next? What the hell can they do now?
Drag the finance minister on TV...
"Dear Citizens
Drug dealers,
terrorists,
pornographers,
criminals, and most importantly
those really nasty people who live in the country next door
are undermining our nation
through this
fake
currency Bitcoin
the fake money!"
"They are in a criminal conspiracy to damage our economy"
"Don't trust it. Do not invest your money in this Bitcoin. It's fake money. It's backed by nothing"
"Fake money, fake money, fake money" they cry and scream and protest. "Fake money!"
You think that's not happening? It's happening right now
watch
Translate if you like, what a Venezuelan said about Bitcoin just a few months ago
"Fake money" In fact, they said it's the Colombians doing it
Right? It's always the weirdos next door who speak with a funny accent, and you know
soft tacos instead of hard tacos! Abomination!
and
So the cry starts slowly at first. "Fake money, fake money, fake money"
Bitcoin is considered fake money in a few places in the world. Where do you think it's considered fake money?
Not here. Nobody's called Bitcoin fake money here
Certainly no official would do that. They'd rather it
remain an obscurity. But in Venezuela Bitcoin is fake money.
In Zimbabwe Bitcoin is fake money, and they write articles about it.
In China
they've tried it a few times. Hasn't played very well with the audience
In the absence of Institutional Authority
there is no basis for evaluating whether money is real or not. or is there?
and what is fake money and real money? who knows ?
are we back in the same cunundrum? are we back in the same
situation where we can no longer tell the difference? Is this just like fake news? Do we all have to discover the truth for ourselves?
No
because money has markets
and markets discover truth, that's what they do. That's what a market does
So if you want to know if Bitcoin is fake money, or the Bolivar is fake money
You have an easy test
You take your Bitcoin and you take your Bolivar, and you take them to someone on the street
and you say: how much will you give me for this?
and if the official exchange rate for the Bolivar is five times less than the unofficial exchange rate
and if the official exchange rate for Bitcoin carries a 20% premium
The market is telling you exactly which money is fake
the market discovers truth
and no matter how many pronouncements, and currency controls, and bank bands, and bank holidays
and demonetization incidents you do. No matter how big you try to make that wall. that dam
once it's got a little flow, a little pinprick, and water is flowing through, it will make that hole bigger
and the truth will come out. And the truth will be evaluated by the market, and you can call
Bitcoin fake money and the Market will say
"well, I'd rather take that fake money than your fake money"
on November 8th
in India, the price of Bitcoin went up and maintained
a 22% premium
against the Rupee
Over any other currency in the world
and
I was asked,
when I went to India
"Why is Bitcoin so expensive here?"
"Why is Bitcoin so expensive?"
Are the exchanges making
obscene profits?
No, they're not. They're not allowed to do arbitrage. Individuals are doing the arbitrage, and so I explained:
It's not the Bitcoin that's too expensive, if I go down
the street right now
with US dollars and buy Bitcoin, the price that they will give me is the exact same price
I can get in San Francisco. Bitcoin's price is exactly the same
but if I give them rupees, they're going to want 22% more rupees. It's not the Bitcoin price that went up
It's the Rupee's discount that went up. The Rupee price collapsed by 22%
because Bitcoin could be moved across borders to settle the arbitrage difference. And then you're stuck with Rupees
and you can't move them. And the fact that you can't move them
imposes an immediate 20% discount. That money is worth 20% less, because it is not portable
and portable is one of the three characteristics of what makes currency, and you just lost one of them
..actually two, because you demonetized most of it
Rupees are trading at a discount against Bitcoin. Bitcoin is the stable price. The market is telling you:
"This is more real money than that stuff"
and so the market discovers truth, and it tells us
But be ready because we're going to start hearing this again, and again, and again, as economies collapse
as currencies get into crisis, and it's happening even in developed nations, is happening in the European union, it could happen here in the US dollar
Who knows?
The markets are trying to correct the situation, and they're going to create a flow of money going out into Bitcoin. People will start removing
their full faith and credit from the system and putting it in Safe Haven assets. Gold, silver, Bitcoin, whatever and
as soon as that happens
you'll start seeing the articles in the newspapers, in the news media. You know, the fake news
telling you about the fake money
and maybe you can tell the truth about what is fake news, and what isn't fake news
But you can always tell the truth about what is real money
and what is fake money. And the easiest way to find out is to go out on the street
and ask the market, and the market will tell you the truth.
Thank you